---
layout: default

title: How to Push to GitHub

permalink: github
---

## todo:

- [ ] figure out the highlight stuff in jeykll - how to I install - I keep getting errors? 
- [ ] figure out if any of the commands are in conflict with the [Heroku guide](http://guides.railsgirls.com/heroku/)
- [x] find out how one finds out if they have Git installed
- [x] find out if there should be a git command between git init and git add . ?
- [x] figure out how to explain the difference between git add . and git add *each commit seperately*

# Push Your App to GitHub

*Created by Alyson La, [@taxaly](www.twitter.com/taxaly)*

## Things you need before you get started

### Check if Git is installed
* Mac Users
 * Open Terminal
	* Type `git --version` (1.8 or higher preferred)
* Windows Users
	* Check for GitHub Shell (GHfW Installer) or Git Bash (Git-Scm.org Installer)
* Download the [GitHub for Mac](www.mac.github.com) or [GitHub for Windows](www.windows.github.com)<sup>1</sup> native client (optional)

<small><sup>1</sup>GitHub for Windows installer provides shell and native clients, all in one.</small>

### Using Git with GitHub
* Create a _free_ [GitHub](https://github.com) account
* Setup your _local_ Git profile
	* Open Terminal (Mac) or Git Shell (Windows)
	* Type `git config --global user.name "<your-name>"`
	* Type `git config --global user.email "<your-email>"`



**COACH:** Talk a little about git, verison control, and open source

There are a two ways to use Git and push your app to GitHub: Using the terminal (aka the command line) or using a native client like GitHub for Mac or GitHub for Window. Using a native client verus the command line is a personal preference. Some people find Git command line interaction initially intimidating, and prefer a native client to make the first steps to using Git easier. The commmand line prompts are good to know, as most open source projects provide instructions using the terminal. Choose what works for you! 

## Push your app to GitHub using the command line

On your GitHub profile click "new repo" - give it a name (example: rails-girls), brief description, and the "public" repo option. If you have not yet started _any_ development, click the "initialize this repository with a README" option.

**COACH:** Explain what a repository is and talk a little about READMEs and markdown.

For a new project, open the command line--making sure you `cd` into your railgirls folder--and type:

(need to use the highlight feature here)

`git init`

This initializes a git repository in your project 
Initialized empty Git repository in Users/you/railsgirls/.git/

*Note:* If you've already done the [Heroku guide](/heroku), then you've already initialized a git repository & you can move on to the next steps. 

Verify what files you want to begin version tracking, first by asking Git to look at your working directory:

`git status`

This will list out all files in your working directory that will be version-controlled in the next step.

Then type:

`git add .`

This adds in all of your files & changes so far to a staging area.

For selectively adding certain files, use the `add` command with a filename, or space separated list of file names. For example:

`git add <file-one> <file-two>`

**COACH:** talk about the difference between `git add .` and the other command you would need to add changes one at a time. (What's this command again?)

Then type:

`git commit -m "first commit"`

This commits all of your files, adding the message "first commit"

Then type: 

`git remote add origin https://github.com/<username>/<repository-name>.git` 

_Your GitHub Repository page will list the repository URL, so feel free to copy and paste from there, rather than typing it in manually. You can copy and paste the link from your GitHub repository page by clicking the clipboard icon next to the URL._

This creates a remote, or _connection_, named "origin" pointing at the GitHub repository you just created.


Then type:

`git push origin master`

This sends your commits in your "master" branch to GitHub

Congratulations your app is on GitHub! If you want to continue making changes and pushing them to GitHub you'll just need to use the following three commands:

`git add .`
`git commit -m "type your commit message here"`
`git push origin master`

Check out what's next below!

## Push your app to GitHub using GitHub for Mac/Windows

Open your GitHub for Mac/Windows native client

Drag and drop your rails girls folder from your local folder structure into where it says *my repositories*.

It you don't already have Git initialized, you'll be prompted to create a new repository. Click "yes" and a Git repository will be created for you!

**COACH:** Explain what a repository is and talk a little about READMEs and markdown. 

## todo: 

* how does one add a README.md file? 
* fill in instructions on how one syncs to a remote git repository?

## What's next?

### Be a Part of the Open Source Community
 
 * Follow your fellow rails girls & coaches on GitHub
 * Star or watch their projects
 * Fork a project, then clone and push changes to your fork. Share the changes with the originator by sending them a pull request!
 * Create an issue on a project when you find a bug
 * Explore other open source projects - search by programming languange or key word

### Check out [trygit.org](www.codeschool.com/trygit)

### Learn how to revert back to previous verisions of your app (insert link here)



