---
layout: default
title: Guides
permalink: coach
---

# Sendo um coach do Rails Girls

*Todas as suas perguntas mais básicas respondidas em um lugar só*

### O que eu preciso para ser um coach do Rails Girls RJ?

Então você ouviu falar do [Rails Girls](http://railsgirls.com) e está se perguntando se você tem o que é necessário para ser um coach em dos workshops? Isso é ótimo! Seu interesse em ajudar os iniciantes a mergulhar no mundo da programação web é um ótimo pré-requisito! O que mais você precisa?

- Paciência, vontade de ajudar e uma atitude amigável :)
- Ser capaz de responder todos os tipos de perguntas um iniciante pode ter de forma amigável (mesmo se a explicação não for *tecnicamente* exata) durante a duração do workshop.
- Experiência em programação web (você sabe o que é MVC, certo?), não necessariamente em Rails.
- Algum tempo pra passar pelo [tutorial básico][rails-girls-app-tutorial-1] antes do evento.

### Porque eu deveria ser um coach no Rails Girls?

Você diz, além de um ótimo karma? Aqui vão algumas coisas que você ganha em troca:

- Você vai conhecer gente interessante fora do seu atual grupo de desenvolvedores.
- Você provavelmente vai aprender algo novo respondendo a questões que você nunca se perguntou antes.
- Gratidão eterna do grupo de meninas e das comunidade do Rails Girls.
- Um épico [\#FridayHug](http://fridayhug.com) como você nunca viu antes.
- Você vai ajudar a quebrar estereótipos sobre mulheres não serem interessadas em tecnologia e programação, ajudar suas irmãs, amigas e parentes, (futuras) filhas a terem mais escolhas no seu futuro. E você pode adicionar tudo isso no seu CV!

### Escolha de tecnologia
Os workshops do Rails Girls dão a primeira experiencia em desenvolvimento de software introduzindo as participantes a Ruby, Rails e HTML/CSS. O currículo foi feito em volta dessas tecnologias. Se o workshop fosse muito difícil ou muito profundo, ele não encorajaria iniciantes a continuarem, já que é muito difícil. Os workshops do Rails Girls não são sobre aprender a programar rápido e eficientemente. É sobre o ambiente aberto, empolgação e aprender as ferramentas que elas podem usar, e ter um dia ótimo aprendendo a programar, conhecendo a comunidades, aplicações web e mais. Adoraríamos ver, por exemplo, meetups de follow-up. Se você quer fazer um evento amigável para iniciantes, inicial para mulheres em outras tecnologias ou frameworks, encorajamos você a fazê-lo e usar materiais existentes. Todo o conteúdo do Rails Girls é licenciado sob a licença creative commons.

### Tempo para completar a aplicação
Tem bastaten tempo para completer a aplicação, então é mais importante explicar devagar o que está acontecendo em cada passo, já que é muito sobre copiar e colar e se as meninas correrem pelo guia, vai ficar tudo pronto muito rápido mas elas não vão entender nada.
Tem bastante tempo (4-5) h reservadas para o app, melhorá-lo e colocá-lo online para os outros verem então não tem pressa :)

### Swag
Acredite ou não, mas pra muitos é realmente importante. Faz o ambiente ser different. Você decide como, mas pequenas mudanças como adesivos, cupcakes, balões, posteres, ou qualquer coisa que você possa fazer para diferenciar faz toda a diferença.

### Inclusivity
Rails Girls is a an inclusive, safe and welcoming experience to everyone. The workshops are primarily intended for beginner women and crafted for this specific user group, but we've always been open to including other skill-levels and genders. Rails Girls coaches are male and female. The end goal of Rails Girls is to enriched the entire Rails community by encouraging more diverse people to join it. If you want to make a different curriculum or group, all the material is online and you are welcome to use it under another name and brand.



### What if I've never done anything in Rails?

Why haven't you yet? Just kidding. That's not a problem at all, we've had a lot of coaches just like you and they were *super awesome*. As long as you're comfortable with any other similar framework, you'll be fine. Take a look at the [basic app guide][app] and you'll probably be able to figure out what's going on pretty soon. Pay attention to the "**Coach**" bits that tell you what you should be able to explain.

Usually there'll be at least somebody at the event who works with Rails on a regular basis, so don't be afraid to ask for help when bundle installs go all weird on you. Also, if you come across something unusual, just Google it with your group! It's ok to admit that you don't know everything and show the girls how you use Google to solve your everyday programming dilemmas.

### What exactly will I be doing as a coach?

The structure of workshop varies a bit from city to city, so your local organizer group will be able you to guide you through the details. Usually there's a pre-event meeting or dinner with coaches where you can ask all you questions.

### Answering questions
Often coaches who are just one step ahead of attendees are the best at explaining :) Use real life metaphors and explain very high-level. Explaining too deep will cause a flood of information that is not necessary at the beginning.

#### Installation Party

Generally speaking, the Rails Girls workshops begin with an Installation party during which you'll be asked to help girls [install the required software][install] (Rails and a text editor). You don't have to be an expert on all operating systems, but you can help on those you are familiar with.

#### Helping girls build their first app

During the following day, you will be the star of the show and help your group of anywhere from 2 to 5 girls build their first [web app][app] in Rails with the help of the tutorial. Usually that happens just after the initial batch of lectures sometime after 11 AM (aka they'll serve you coffee first).

Going through the tutorial on your own at home will usually be all the preparation you need. The girls will have the app guide open on their screens, so just guide them through the process, providing explanations of what's going on at each step. The explanations shouldn't be highly technical; try to simplify the answer by providing easy to remember metaphors. And remember that there is no such thing as a stupid question at a Rails Girls workshop! Let girls know they can ask you about anything along the way; you can spend more time on parts they find more interesting.

Also, don't be discouraged if you'll sometimes need to try a few different explanations. Most girls will be beginners, so they won't have many existing points of reference (bonus point: nor will they have any bad habits some programmers tend to pick up along the way). If you get to the end of the basic app tutorial, you can explore additional guides at the end or work on whatever your group is most interested in; design is usually a popular choice, but some girls will want to try building another app. You can also prepare your own challenges for girls or explore helpful resources (documentation etc).

If you need help with anything, don't be afraid to use Google or ask another coach to help you out. And don't be afraid to ask for a break if you need it, it's going to be a long day, but we can promise you'll get home with a big smile and a warm heart :)

* Check Lucy Bain's additional [teaching notes to the app](https://github.com/lbain/railsgirls)

### Are you in?

Good, we're happy to have you on board! Get in touch with organizers of your local event (if you aren't already) and they'll answer all the other questions you might have. You can usually find their contact info on the event's page.

If you're traveling abroad at the time of a Rails Girls workshop, do feel free to contact the organizers of the city you'll be visiting; we're always happy to welcome additional coaches! Not to mention that a Rails Girls workshop is a great excuse to visit a new city ;)

Some other great first-hand tips from Rails Girls coaches:

- [4 lessons learned from teaching at Rails Girls Berlin](http://pragtob.wordpress.com/2012/08/14/4-lessons-learned-from-teaching-at-rails-girls-berlin/)
- [I infiltrated #railsgirlslj, here’s what it was like](http://swizec.com/blog/i-infiltrated-railsgirlsj-heres-what-it-was-like/swizec/5717)
- [8 ways to enable workshop attendess to keep learning](http://pragtob.wordpress.com/2013/06/14/8-ways-to-enable-workshop-attendess-to-keep-learning/)
- [What I learned learning Rails / becoming a better teacher](http://floordrees.tumblr.com/post/58784746482/what-i-learned-learning-rails-becoming-a-better)
- [Tips for coaching a programming study group](http://coaching.rubymonstas.org/)

[app]: http://guides.railsgirls.com/app
[install]: http://guides.railsgirls.com/install/
